5266 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.9,NO.7,APRIL1,2022
Bushfire Risk Detection Using Internet of Things:
An Application Scenario
Mohammad Reza Nosouhi , Member, IEEE, Keshav Sood , Neeraj Kumar , Senior Member, IEEE,
Tricia Wevill, and Chandra Thapa , Member, IEEE
Abstract—With rising temperatures and events contribut- and human–intervention related factors, such as weather,
ing to climate change, the world is facing extreme weather natural phenomena, topography, carbon emissions, seasonal-
patterns. Recently, Australia was hit hard by bushfires, the
ity, etc. [1]. On one side, essentially, it is shaping the nature
most devastating fires ever faced by the country. The eco-
and planet naturally in a variety of ways, but, on the other
nomicdamagereportedwasnearlyonebillionAustraliandollars
and an estimated three billion native animals were killed or hand, the high frequency of occurrence of bushfire adversely
adverselyaffected.Giventheextentandintensityofthisdamage, impacts flora and fauna, both human and animal life, damage
researchersareseekingeffectivesolutionstoenabletheprediction to properties, creates health issues due to air pollution, post
of fire before it starts to increase the time available for firefight-
bushfire psychological problems, and high economic impacts.
ers to protect lives and assets and prepare to mitigate the fires.
ManyareasinAustraliaarepronetobushfireastheclimateis
This motivated us to investigate an approach to address this
critical problem. In this article, we propose a machine learning generally dry and hot in many states [2] and drought is com-
(ML)-based approach that detects anomalies in spatiotemporal mon. For natural hazards and disasters, including bushfires,
measurements of environmental parameters (e.g., temperature, GeoscienceAustraliaisresponsibleforpreparednessandman-
relative humidity, etc.). In the proposed approach, an ML-based
agementactivities.Ithasbeenreportedthatthebushfireseason
modellearnsthenormalspatiotemporalbehavioroftheenviron-
2019–2020wastheworstseasonrecordedinAustralia[3],[4].
mentaldata(collectedoveraperiodofoneyear).Thisiscarried
outduringaone-timetrainingphase.Then,duringthedetection Some devastating impacts reported in [3] and [5], caused by
phase,anyspatiotemporalpatterninthereal-timedata(received the 2019–2020 bushfire season are listed as follows.
from the field sensors) that is different than the normal pattern 1) More than one billion animals died and three billion
will be identified by the model as anomaly which indicates a
wereaffectedintotal,whichisthehighestrateofspecies
possible bushfire situation. Following this, we propose a supple-
loss in any area in the world [6].
mentaryclassificationmodelbasedonMoran’sIindextoensure
thatthedetectedanomaliesarenotduetoeitherasensorfailure 2) Theairpollutioncausedbyseverebushfiresin2020.The
or a security attack (which are common in Internet of Things). Australian Capital Territory (ACT), Canberra measured
WedevelopedthreedifferentMLmodelsforperformanceevalu- theworstairqualityindexofanymajorcityintheworld
ation and comparison and used the Forest Fire data set to train
inJanuarythesameyear.Thishasadverselyaffectedter-
them.Theresultsofourexperimentsconfirmtheeffectivenessof
ritory’s residents with severe health risks, including [7]
the proposed approach in the early detection of fire symptoms.
asthma, impaired vision, increased risk of heart attacks,
IndexTerms—Agriculture4.0,artificialintelligence,Australian
and the development of neurological conditions, etc.
bushfire, edge computing, Internet of Things (IoT).
3) This has significantly affected the farming and tourism
industry. Severe economic damage was reported in
I. INTRODUCTIONANDBACKGROUND
2019–2020 due to the Australian bushfire, nearly one
BUSHFIRE is commonly known as an unplanned vegeta- billion Australian dollars had been reported as insur-
tion fire or wildfire (grass fires, forest fires, and scrub ancelossesasaresultofthebushfires,almost13million
fires, etc.), at a large scale. This occurs due to both natural hectares of land was been burned. [8].
4) Furthermore the total costs associated with extreme
Manuscript received July 10, 2021; accepted August 22, 2021. Date of
weather and climate change is difficult to quantify. The
publication September 6, 2021; date of current version March 24, 2022.
(Correspondingauthor:KeshavSood.) damage-relatedlossinpropertyvaluesfromclimatehaz-
MohammadRezaNosouhiandKeshavSoodarewiththeCentreofCyber ards across Australia in 2030 is estimated at 571 billion
Security Research Innovation, School of Information Technology, Deakin
Australian dollars [3]. Overall, we note that the impact
University,Geelong,VIC3220,Australia(e-mail:m.nosouhi@deakin.edu.au;
keshav.sood@deakin.edu.au). of bushfire is devastating in Australia.
Neeraj Kumar is with the Department of Computer Science and Towards this problem, it is critical to have effective and
Engineering, Thapar University, Patiala 147004, India, also with the
accurate forecasting systems to be in place to make better
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Asia
University,TaichungCity413,Taiwan,andalsowiththeSchoolofComputer decisions for the mitigation of fire risks and hazards. Many
Science,UniversityofPetroleumandEnergyStudies,Dehradun248007,India attempts have been made as briefly mentioned below.
(e-mail:neeraj.kumar@thapar.edu).
Satellites-Based Solutions: In [9]–[11] satellite images are
Tricia Wevill is with the School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3220, Australia (e-mail: analyzed to detect areas that are generating a high level of
tricia.wevill@deakin.edu.au). infrared radiation (called hot spots). However, this approach
ChandraThapaiswiththeDistributedSystemsSecurity,Data61,CSIRO,
suffers from high latency between successive scans, i.e., res-
Marsfield,NSW2122,Australia(e-mail:chandra.thapa@data61.csiro.au).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/JIOT.2021.3110256 canning of the same area needs a significant amount of
2327-4662(cid:2)c 2021IEEE.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.NOSOUHIetal.:BUSHFIRERISKDETECTIONUSINGINTERNETOFTHINGS:APPLICATIONSCENARIO 5267
time[12].Inaddition,thedetectedhot-spotareadoesnotindi- theoriginofthedetectedanomalies,i.e.,earlysymptoms
cate the exact location of a fire. It is also possible that clouds of a bushfire, sensor failures, or a security attack.
orthesmokepreventthesystemtohaveanaccurateestimation 3) We implemented the proposed approach in an edge
of the fire location. Thus, limited resolution and the lack of computing setting to furthermore reduce the detection
real-time data generation make the satellite imagery approach latency.
inefficient for continuous monitoring of a forest zone [12]. Our results confirm the accuracy and effectiveness of the
Moreover,whentheheatsourceistoosmall(attheearlystages proposed approach. We present the related work in Section II.
of a bushfire), the system may not consider that zone as a hot The proposed architecture and implementation details are
spot [11]. given in Sections III and IV, respectively. Performance
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)-Based Solutions: evaluation results and further discussion are given in
Furthermore, UAVs have been used to take real-time Sections V and VI, respectively. We summarize this article in
images of fire in the areas that are extremely dangerous Section VII.
to access [12]–[14]. The images are analyzed to assess the
situation and make operational decisions to prevent outbreaks
of the fire. UAVs can also be equipped with thermal imaging
II. RELATEDWORK
cameras to enable firefighters to see through the smoke
and search for the victims. This approach is effective in In [13], a comprehensive survey presents the current prob-
post-fire situations but has very limited advantage in the early lemsofforestfirefightingandstate-of-the-artrobotictechnolo-
detection of bushfire. In addition, UAVs need high-speed giesandsolutionsinfirefightingmissions.Akhloufietal.[12]
communication links for the transmission of high-quality reviewed previous research and industry works done in bush-
images that is a big issue in many regional forest areas. fire management using UAV applications. It considers differ-
Section II covers more detail of the practical solutions being ent onboard sensor instruments, fire perception algorithms,
used by Australian fire agencies. and coordination strategies. Below, we highlight the key
Motivated from this, we propose to use the Internet of approaches being used by different Australian authorities in
Things (IoT) technology and machine learning (ML) mod- the Bushfire context.
els to identify early symptoms of a bushfire. Our proposal Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) and Geoscience
is based on spatial correlation theory. We first train the ML Australia: In Australia, weather forecasts are provided by the
modelusingtheForestFirerealdatasetcollectedfromatarget BOM.Correspondingfireauthoritiesdeterminetheappropriate
area over a period of one year [15]. Then, the real-time envi- firedangerrating(FDR)byconsideringthepredictedweather,
ronmental data (collected from IoT network and tagged with includingtemperature,relativehumidity,windspeed,anddry-
spatiotemporal information) is fed to the trained model for nessofvegetation.TheseFDRsoralerts(viaradio,TV,andthe
the identification of possible anomalies. Note that the outliers Internet) help the government and communities to take essen-
in sensor data can also be generated by nonbushfire events, tial appropriate actions to minimize the potential impact and
such as sensor failures or security attacks. In other words, loss. Recently, Geoscience Australia has developed the (real-
bushfire detection using an approach that is solely based on time) Sentinel bushfire monitoring system [5], Digital Earth
outliers may result in high false positive rates. To address this Australia Hotspots, a national bushfire monitoring system.
issue, we utilize the spatial correlation between sensor mea- This collects areas generating a high level of infrared radi-
surements and develop a supplementary classification model ation (called Hotspots), via satellites at 10 min intervals, to
to ensure that any detected anomaly has been created due to identify possible fire risks [10]. But it is unable to provide
the early symptoms of a bushfire. The proposed model works real-time information; every hot-spot information is about 17
based on Moran’s I index [16], [17] which is an effective min old. Furthermore, the hot-spot size does not indicate the
tool for the measurement of spatial correlation in distributed exact fire zone. Also in cases where the heat source is too
architectures. small to detect, the system does not consider that zone as a
WeimplementedaProofofConcept(PoC)ofourapproach hot-spot leading to inaccurate hot-spot identification [11].
in Python. We also performed a prototype implementation of MyFireWatch Project: This solution is based on an existing
the approach in an edge computing setting to ensure its effec- DepartmentofFireandEmergencyServices(DFES)program,
tiveness to generate fire alerts at the very early stage of a redeveloped by Landgate and Edith Cowan University (ECU),
bushfire. Australia,forusebythegeneralpublic[18].Thissystemgives
Our contributions in this article are as follows. aviewofsatelliteobservedhot-spotsbydetectingheatsources
1) We propose an ML-based anomaly detection approach aboveacertaintemperaturelevel.Furthermore,thesehot-spots
forearlydetectionofbushfire.Intheproposedapproach, update at 2–4 h intervals and do not fully indicate the exact
the measurement and collection of spatiotemporal envi- level of severity. It does not provide the exact coordinates of
ronmental data is performed using an IoT network. The potential fire zones, is unable to determine accurately beyond
collectedreal-timedataisanalyzedbytheMLmodelto 2 km, hot-spots in the presence of smoke and cloud can-
identify any spatiotemporal pattern that is different than not be detected. Besides the use of satellites, the Australian
the normal pattern. firefighters also make use of UAVs as a tool for combating
2) Toreducethenumberoffalsepositivedetections,asup- fire [14]. The UAVs (particularly drones) provide real-time
plementary classification model is proposed to estimate pictures of fire zones that are extremely dangerous to access.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.5268 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.9,NO.7,APRIL1,2022
Thisapproachiseffectiveinpost-firesituationstoenablefire-
fighterstomakeearlyassessmentsofdamagewhileenrouteto
emergencies. The cost of UAVs and the requirement of high
speed Internet connectivity are key hurdles in many regional
areas or underdeveloped countries.
Bushfire Attack Level Toolbox: Researchers also use
modeling to analyze the potential impact of fire before it
occurs. For example, to measure the impact of fires on build-
ings, the Bushfire Attack Level Toolbox is developed which
Fig.1. Proposedsystemarchitecture.
provides access to ArcGIS geoprocessing scripts to calculate
BushfireAttackLevelratings[19].Foracomprehensiveunder-
standingofwhybushfiremonitoringsystemsdoesnotworkas
intended, we encourage readers to follow [20] and references have used a natural physical phenomenon of data, i.e., the
therein. Also, very recent recommendations provided by the readings of two nearby IoT units would be the same under
Nature Conservation Society of South Australia (NCSSA) to normal conditions. For example, humidity and temperature
the federal government to preparedness for, response to, and wouldnotchangedramaticallyovershortdistances.Therefore,
recovery from bushfire disasters are listed in [21]. we assume that the sensor readings or data would be corre-
FireCloud Project: In FireCloud, a recently done bushfire lated with its neighbors data, with very high probability. In
detection project [22], the existing satellite-based fire detec- this case, there is no spatial correlation between the outliers
tion systems are supplemented with ground-based IoT remote is detected. Contrary if the outlier detection module detects
sensing devices to enhance the accuracy and speed of the any outlier then the data streams are forwarded to a spatial
bushfire detection process. However, it is difficult to judge correlation-basedrecognitionmodulewhichisanintegralpart
the effectiveness of this work since its results have not been of the computing module at the edge of the network.
published (e.g., experimental results). Moreover, it lacks an Case 2 (Fire Danger Exists): As mentioned before that in
effective approach to confront the possible incorrect mea- the presence of an outlier, the data is forwarded to a spatial
surements sent by either faulty sensors or illegitimate IoT correlation module to accurately identify the potential risk of
sensors/attacked sensors (in case of a cyber attack on the fire. If the readings are all in the same cluster (no outlier
deployed IoT network). Indeed, any IoT-based approach for detected at this stage), as expected the framework would still
bushfiredetection mustbeequipped withaneffective solution considerthisscenarioasnofiredanger.Inthecaseofhighfire
toaddresssuchthreats(atleastpubliclyaccessibleforestareas probability, the level of temperature or humidity will increase
should be protected). naturally which will be measured by sensors and forwarded
SynthesisoftheExistingSolutions:Tothebestofourunder- to the computing module for analyses. In this case, an outlier
standing,thecurrentexistingsolutionslacktheabilitytoreport would be generated. Using this approach of outlier detection,
the exact location/coordinates of a potential fire area in real- the field or zone would be considered as “Fire Danger Zone".
time before the fire occurs. In addition, the post-fire solutions However, this case is further divided into three parts.
are not cost effective. Furthermore, we emphasize that due to Case2.1(FalseFireDangerZone):Thesensorsaremostly
digitizationineverydomain,theriskofcyber-attackisanother deployed in harsh environments. It could be possible that
factor that might compromise the existing techniques to gen- there is no fire but the sensor is giving faulty readings. The
erate a false alert and false negative predictions. The existing system could produce outliers and the system may consider
approaches do not integrally consider approaches to distin- thisscenarioasFireDangerZone,althoughitisfalse.Counter
guishtrueandfalsebushfirealerts.Inourapproach,weutilize Argument.Usingthespatialcorrelationbetweenmeasurements
a module which enables the network to distinguish legitimate of neighboring IoT sensors we note that in case of a sensor
and compromised alerts. failure, the failed sensor will generate faulty data, and thus
an outlier will be detected but with a very low probability its
neighbor sensors also generate faulty measurements as well.
III. OURPROPOSEDAPPROACH
Thus,themeasurementsreceivedfromitsneighborsensorsare
Inthissection,wepresentahighlevelviewofourproposed not classified as outliers as no significant spatial correlation
approach for bushfire detection. between the measurements is detected.
Case 1 (No Fire Danger): In the proposed approach, we Case 2.2 (Compromised Fire Danger Zone): It could also
consider a land/zone where IoT devices or units are deployed be possible that the sensors are compromised and giving fake
taking environmental readings, i.e., temperature and humid- readings. If there are more outliers, then it will be very chal-
ity. The sensor streams continuously generated by IoT units lenging for the system to differentiate the faulty/false and
areforwarded toacomputing device placed attheedge ofthe compromised behavior. Counter Argument. We note that in
networkusingedgecomputingtechnology.Thesensorstreams caseofacyberattackontheIoTnetwork,severalneighboring
collected from the IoT units (of a small forest land/zone) are sensors are targeted by the attacker. Therefore, neighbor sen-
analysed to detect an outlier (see Fig. 1). In the absence of sors will also generate faulty measurements. In other words,
any outlier detection, the system considers the zone as no fire with a very high probability, multiple sensors (located in the
danger, which means no risk of fire is identified. Here, we neighborhood of the malicious node) will also be affected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.NOSOUHIetal.:BUSHFIRERISKDETECTIONUSINGINTERNETOFTHINGS:APPLICATIONSCENARIO 5269
Fig.2. Work-flowoftheproposedapproach.
Thus, a significant spatial correlation between the measure- secondphase(outlierdetection),thereal-timesensormeasure-
ments can be observed. In this case, the clustering decisions ments received from the IoT field network are analysed by an
are made based on the possible spatial correlation between ML model to detect an outlier. In the absence of any outlier
the measurements. In other words, measurements of all the detection, the system considers the IoT field network behav-
compromised sensors change rapidly and do not follow a ior as normal or No Fire Danger. Alternatively, if the system
location-based and smooth pattern while in case of a true fire, detects any outlier, then the data streams are forwarded to
there is a smooth pattern in the change of readings received a spatial correlation-based recognition module. At this third
from neighbor sensors over time, i.e., the outliers are origi- phase (spatial correlation-based classification), the spatial-
nated from a particular location and gradually propagate to correlation data of these outliers are fed to a classifier in
other sensor locations. order to accurately classify the detected outliers into one of
Now, the next step is to exactly find the attacked sensors the above mentioned clusters, i.e., False Fire Danger Zone,
andtheirlocation.Toeffectivelyexploitthespatialcorrelation Compromised Fire Danger Zone, and True Fire Danger Zone.
betweensensormeasurements,weutilizeaspecialmechanism Primarily, we have used the spatial correlation between the
thattakesthenetworkaddress(e.g.,IPaddress)ofsensorsand detected outlier and the measurements of its neighbor sensors
returns their x and y coordinates. To do this, we consider a to decide on whether the outlier is due to a sensor failure or
grid that covers the whole geographical area which is under a security attack. We assume that IoT humidity and tempera-
protection. Then, every sensor is assigned with an appropriate ture wireless sensors have been already installed in the field
x and y coordinate based on its physical location. We empha- that effectively covers a target area. The sensor measurements
size that in the case of mobile IoT sensors this process can are collected by an edge system that is connected to the core
be performed using a dynamic method since the location of system. Regarding the learning model, we have used three
a sensor may change with respect to time. This can be easily ML classification algorithms, i.e., classification and regres-
implementedsincemobilesensorsusuallysendtheirreal-time sion trees (CARTs), random forest (RF), and support vector
location data too along with the data streams. machine (SVM) at the edge segment to detect outliers. In our
Case2.3(TrueFireDanger Zone):Itcanbearguedthatall experiments, we have used the Forest Fire real data set [15].
sensors in this case may generate the same readings and thus The data set has been created from the meteorological data
a high level of spatial correlation will be detected. Counter gathered in the northeast region of Portugal over a period of
Argument. We first accept that this is true, however, if we four years. In the next section, we present the mathematical
increase the land/zone size then it is again highly likely that modeling of our approach.
the readings of one zone from another will be different and
the outlier will definitely be detected. We emphasize that the
zone size in this case plays an essential role. Therefore, the A. Mathematical Modelling
comparison of different zones or clusters of different zones As said previously, we utilize the spatial correlation
with each other will also provide more accurate insights of between measurements from neighboring sensors to distin-
potential risk. guish between a false fire danger detection and a true bushfire
case.Todothis,wehaveutilizedtheMoran’sIindex[16],[17]
whichisanindicatorofspatialcorrelationindistributedarchi-
tectures. There are global and local versions of the Moran’s
IV. IMPLEMENTATIONANDARCHITECTUREDETAILS
I index available. The global version indicates the level of
In Fig. 2 we have presented the work-flow of our approach
spatial correlation over an entire region and is calculated as
which is divided into three phases (particularly based on spa-
follows:
tialcorrelationbetweensensormeasurements).Thefirstphase
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4)
is the preprocessing phase in which the data streams from
S S S (cid:2) (m −m¯) m −m¯
IoT sensors are collected and processed. This phase is per- MI= (cid:2)i=1 (cid:2)j=1 ij (cid:2)i j
formed once only during the setup of the IoT network. In the S i=1 S j=1(cid:2) ij S i=1(m i−m¯)2
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.5270 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.9,NO.7,APRIL1,2022
TABLEI
DESCRIPTIONOFTHEFORESTFIREDATASET
where S is the number of measuring units (sensors), m is resultsinhavingthemeasurementsofs anditsneighborsstill
i i
the value of the desired feature measured by sensor s, and spatially correlated.
i
m¯ is the mean value of feature m. We also need to determine
what sensors are considered as neighbor. This is applied on V. PERFORMANCEEVALUATION
the Moran’s I expression using the (cid:2) ij weights. For example, In this section, we discuss the test settings, experi-
if s i and s j are neighbor, then (cid:2) ij = 1, otherwise, (cid:2) ij = 0. ments results, PoC implementation, and a comparison of our
However, we have adopted a more conservative approach in approach with three related research works.
which (cid:2) weights are obtained using r which is the physical
ij ij
distance between s i and s j, i.e., A. Test Settings
1 WehavedevelopedaPoCusingPython3.7.4.Twotypesof
(cid:2) = .
ij r2 workstations were used for the experiments: 1) Intel Core i5–
ij
11600 2.80-GHz CPU with 8 GB of RAM and 2) Intel Core
For the values of MI close to 0, it is concluded that there
i7–7700K @4.20-GHz CPU with 64 GB of RAM. We also
is no spatial correlation in the spatial data set. On the other
used an Android mobile device LG G4–H818P equipped with
hand, if the absolute value of MI is greater than 0, the global
a Hexa–Core 1.8-GHz processor, 3 GB of RAM, and running
correlation of the spatial data set is confirmed.
Android OS 5.1, acting as an IoT device.
The expected value of the MI index is calculated as
Regarding the IoT network, we have used the Eclipse Paho
(−1/S−1) [16], [17]. However, the standardized version of
MQTT Python library [23]. The Python code enables the
MI is generally used to determine the thresholds on which
MQTTclientsandbrokerstopublishamessageandsubscribe
the spatial correlation becomes significant in a data set. The
toatopicandreceiveapublishedmessageaswell.Weusethe
global Moran’s I index is standardized to G(MI) as follows:
Forest Fire real data set [15] for performance evaluation. The
MI−Exp(MI) data set has different features, including spatial data (x and
G(MI)= (cid:5) .
(cid:3) (cid:4) y coordinates) and meteorological features, such as tempera-
Exp MI2 −(Exp(MI))2
tureandrelativehumidity(seeTableIpresentsthefeaturesof
For example, a spatial data set is correlated with a confi- the data set.). For the outlier detection phase, we have used
dence level of 95%, if |G| is greater than 1.96. The global three ML algorithms, i.e., CARTs, RF, and SVM. To model
Moran’s I index reflects the level of spatial correlation over the real fire danger scenario we have added Gaussian noise
thewholedataset.Thus,weusethelocalversionoftheindex to the measurements of several randomly selected neighbor
to determine the degree of correlation between neighbor sen- sensors.
sors only. For a specific sensor s, the local version of the In addition, we define R as the percentage of sensors that
i
index is calculated as follows: send outlier measurements. We change R from 1% to 5%
to see how it affects the accuracy of the proposed solution.
(m i−m¯) (cid:6)S (cid:3) −m¯(cid:4)
MI = (cid:2) m , where Furthermore, to evaluate the intensity of the outliers, we have
i p2 ij j changed the level of the injected Gaussian noise by consid-
i j=1,j(cid:3)=i
(cid:2) ering its standard deviation (sigma) as a percentage of the
S (cid:2)
p2 = j=1 ij −m¯2. value of each measurement. For this reason, we have changed
i S−1 sigma from 0.2T to 0.5T for temperature outliers and from
Thus, after an outlier is detected by the outlier detection 0.2H to 0.5H for humidity outliers, where T and H are
module for sensor s, the local Moran’s I index MI is calcu- the true measurements of temperature and humidity, respec-
i i
lated for s to obtain the degree of spatial correlation between tively. Naturally, lower levels of noise result in more difficult
i
s and its neighbors. If the index is close to 0, false fire dan- detection of the relevant outliers.
i
ger will be reported since in this case, there is no correlation
B. Results
between the measurements of s and its neighbors. In other
i
words, it indicates s is malfunctioning while other sensors Figs. 3 and 4 show the detection accuracy of the three
i
are working well. However, in case of real fire danger, all employedMLalgorithmsfortemperatureandhumidityparam-
the neighbor sensors are generally affected by the event. This eters, respectively. As we see in the figures, a higher level of
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.NOSOUHIetal.:BUSHFIRERISKDETECTIONUSINGINTERNETOFTHINGS:APPLICATIONSCENARIO 5271
Fig. 3. Detection accuracy based on temperature measurements and the percentage of sensors who generate outlier measurements (a) CART, (b) RF, and
(c)SVMalgorithms.
Fig. 4. Detection accuracy based on humidity measurements and the percentage of sensors who generate outlier measurements (a) CART, (b) RF, and
(c)SVMalgorithms.
the added noise results in higher accuracy, as we expected.
Thus, during the beginning of a bushfire and considering a
fixed value of R, the detection accuracy increases over time
because the new measurements are distancing from the nor-
mal expected measurements. This behavior is seen for all
the three algorithms. Moreover, having a larger value of R
results in higher accuracy. This is because in this case the
data set is more skewed, and therefore a new cluster can
be created that convinces the classifier algorithms to label
it as a separate cluster (i.e., anomaly). In addition, the fig- Fig.5. NetworkstructureofourPoCdesign.
ures show that the CART and RF algorithms perform better
than the SVM algorithm in terms of detection accuracy.
They both give similar performance and can detect outliers server. Moreover, PRTG Network Monitor [25] was used to
with the accuracy of as high as 99.4% when 5% of sen- monitor the latency between the IoT devices and the servers.
sors generate outliers. However, the SVM algorithm gives the Regarding the latency between the IoT devices and servers,
worst performance among the three algorithms. Specifically, as Fig. 6(a) and (b) show, the proposed approach performs
in case of a lower number of sensors that generate outliers significantly faster in the first scenario in which the detection
(i.e., R = 1% or R = 2%), SVM performance is poor process is done by the edge server. For example, considering
in terms of detection accuracy. This may result in delayed the packet size of 32B, we obtained the average latency of
detections if SVM is employed because it needs a higher 19 ms in this case while the average latency of 73 ms was
number of sensors that generate outliers in order to detect a obtained in the second scenario in which the sensor measure-
bushfire case. ments are sent to a cloud server by the IoT devices where the
We have also performed the PoC implementation of our detection procedure is performed. Thus, the detection time of
approachintwodifferentscenariostoevaluateitsperformance a bushfire can be effectively increased by employing several
intermsoflatency.Fig.5showsthenetworkstructureusedin edge servers (each one covers a specific zone in the target
our prototype implementation. First, we performed the detec- area) that collect IoT sensor measurements and perform the
tionprocessusinganedgeserverthatwaslocatedclosetothe proposed detection approach. The detected events, logs, and
IoT device (within the Wifi range). In the second scenario, performance of the edge servers can be monitored in the core
the procedure was performed by a cloud server with a phys- segment of the network using a centralized server.
ical distance of 280 km to the IoT field network. We used Wealsorecordedtheend–to–endlatencyinthedetectionof
ZeroTier [24] to connect the IoT field network to the cloud bushfire symptoms. To emulate the behavior of environmental
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.5272 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.9,NO.7,APRIL1,2022
TABLEII
COMPARISONOFOURAPPROACHWITHTHREERESEARCHWORKSINTHEFIELDOFOUTLIERDETECTION
Fig.7. Averageend–to–endlatency(changestepw.r.tsensornumbers),time
intervalbetweensensorreadingswas10s.
Fig.6. LatencyreportbetweentheIoTdeviceand(a)edgecomputingserver
and(b)cloudserver.
parameters at the early stage of a bushfire (e.g., when tem-
perature and relative humidity are increasing and decreasing,
respectively), we artificially changed the consecutive sensor
readings by steps of 20%, 30%, and 50% (see Fig. 7). As we
expected,thelowestdetectiontimewasrecordedatthechange Fig. 8. Average accuracy of attack detection based on the percentage of
victimsensorsandtheMoran’sIindexthresholdθ 1.Intheexperiments,θ
step of 50%. This indicates that the detection time adapts to 2
hasbeensetto5.
the spreading speed of fire at its early stage. Moreover, the
detection latency heavily depends on the time gap between
twosuccessivesensorreadings,i.e.,refreshtime(inourexper-
system obtains a small MI for those sensors (close to 0). In
iments, we used the refresh time of 10 s). In fact, to detect
this case, the outlier is classified as either a sensor failure (if
ananomaly,thereshouldbeaminimumdistancebetweentwo theobtainedMIislowerthanthefirstthresholdθ )orasecu-
1
consecutive readings. However, this distance may not be cre-
rityattack(otherwise).However,whenasignificantnumberof
ated at a single sensor reading (specifically, at low change
sensors are affected by the attack, the system obtains a large
steps, e.g., 15%). In other words, the ML-based anomaly
MI because in this case, a large number of sensors are report-
detection model may need to receive a few numbers of suc-
ing outliers. In this case, the calculated MI is compared with
cessive sensor readings before it can detect an anomaly. As
the second level of threshold to classify the outlier as either a
Fig. 7 shows, the highest level of latency was recorded at
security attack (if the calculated MI is lower than the second
the change step of 15% due to the small increase/decrease threshold θ ) or a bushfire (otherwise).
2
in the measured values. Furthermore, having a large number
of sensors (S) imposes additional processing overhead on the
C. Comparison
system. This is mainly due to the calculation of MIs for a
i
large number of sensors. Table II shows the results of a comparison between our
We performed some experiments to evaluate the system approachandthreeresearchworksinthefieldofoutlierdetec-
performanceintermsofdistinguishingbetweenabushfirecase tion [26]–[28]. For the results of our work, we present the
andasecurityattack(seeFig.8).Inthisregard,weusedthree average of accuracy and F-score metrics regarding the four
different values for the number of victim sensors (those who resultsachieved usingthefourdifferentvaluesofsigmawhen
have been successfully compromised by the attacker). This is R = 1%. In [26], an IoT outlier detection architecture is
animportantfactorsincetheMoran’sIindexMIofeveryout- proposedtodetecttheoccurrenceofanomaliesinaforestenvi-
lier depends on the number of victim sensors. In other words, ronment using four different learning algorithms, i.e., CART,
if a limited number of sensors are affected by the attack, the RF,gradientboostingmachine(GBM),andlineardiscriminant
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.NOSOUHIetal.:BUSHFIRERISKDETECTIONUSINGINTERNETOFTHINGS:APPLICATIONSCENARIO 5273
analysis (LDA). We only present the best accuracy achieved solutions and identify cost-effective architectural solutions for
in [26] (they have achieved a low accuracy of 78% using the effective collection of real-time environmental data from
the LDA learning model). As seen in Table II, their models largeforestareas.However, afeasibleandmorecost-effective
have never reached accuracies greater than 97.7% for temper- approachcouldbetodividetheforestareaintoseveralsmaller
ature. For humidity, they have achieved the highest level of zones (i.e., cells). Then, every cell is covered by spreading
99.3%. However, there is no information and discussion in low-cost sensors which form a single wireless sensor network
the paper about the standard deviation (sigma) of the artificial (WSN)inthatcell.Infact,everyWSNrepresentsasmall-scale
noise added to the data set for outlier generation. In fact, the cell that can be replicated in a larger scale to cover the entire
accuracy will increase if we use a higher level of sigma as forest. Each WSN is connected to the main network through
confirmed by Figs. 3 and 4. one or multiple IoT nodes that serve as wireless gateways.
In [27], the ellipsoidal neighborhood outlier factor (ENOF) This would be a more economic architectural solution since
mechanism [29] has been used to distinguish normal and the deployment of WSNs is much cheaper than deploying a
anomaly measurements. ENOF is an outlier detection algo- large number of IoT nodes.
rithm in which each data point receives an outlier score with We do agree that the above solution would stillnot be fully
respect to the densities of its close neighborhood. Those data practical and cost-effective. Feasibility still remains an open
points that are located in a dense group of data points receive issue. However, we argue that it would be good to identify
a small score and vice versa. The ENOF model also needs to highfireriskareasfirst,andthenencouragelandowners(such
calculate a threshold value using the standard deviation of the as, big farm land, forest zone under forest ministry, etc.), to
ENOF scores. This threshold is then used to make anomaly allowtodeploythegivenapproach,athighlysubsidizedrates.
decisions.Intheirwork,ISSNIP[30]andIBRL[31]datasets Residents living nearby potential zones, and emergency fire
have been used for the experiments that include both temper- departmentswillreceiveanalertviaalocallydeployedsystem,
atureandhumiditymeasurements.AlthoughtheENOFmodel respectively,togetprepareinadvance.Graduallydeployingthe
offers a high level of accuracy, it is still outperformed by our approach from small scale to large scale zone will eventually
approach(thevaluesofF-scoremetrichavenotbeenpresented strengthen the overall effectiveness of the complete bushfire
in their work). prediction system without replacing the legacy system.
Furthermore,in[28],amodularandhybridanomalydetection Towards the third concern, it is arguable to say that the
systemisproposedforIoTapplications.Itusesacloudserver deployment of 5G technology and the network slicing con-
for anomaly detection in both application and network layers cepts within that technology can potentially help to achieve
and train a centralized learning model. The model weights multitenants heterogeneous service requirements [32], [33].
obtained by the cloud server are then transferred to the IoT However, we are still far away with a complete roll out
devices for local anomaly detection. Although it offers effi- of 5G networks. Thus, this is an open challenge, and we
cientperformanceintermsofdetectionlatency,theirachieved need to be cautious with the deployment of the approach
accuraciesarestilllowerthanourapproach.Thereasonisthat using legacy telecommunication providers until 5G reaches
thereisadeviationbetweenthepredictionsmadebytheserver in regional areas. We welcome the research community to
and the ones made locally at the IoT devices. Furthermore, it collaborate with us to address this critical and urgent issue.
requires the local IoT devices to be frequently updated by the
cloud server. This may increase the communication overhead
VII. SUMMARYANDFUTUREWORK
of the system and affects the accuracy.
For early detection of bushfire dangers in almost real-time,
anapproachbasedonMLandspatialcorrelationbetweensen-
VI. FURTHERDISCUSSIONANDLIMITATIONS sor measurements is developed and validated at the edge of
the network. The proposed mechanism also ensures that if
The shown approach is simple and effective but there are
an attacker successfully attacks the network (e.g., control sen-
certain aspects that need to be rigorously explored such as:
sorcommunications,manipulatetheirmeasurements,etc.),the
1)Willtheproposedapproachtrulyreplacethelegacybushfire
created outliers do not fool the system to generate a false fire
detectionsystems?2)Doweneedtodeploythesensorsevery-
alarm. This means the proposal accurately shows that either
where in the forests to detect Bushfires? 3) How to deal with
the fire alarm is due to a true bushfire danger rather than a
two different verticals (tenants) partially using the same IoT
sensorfailureoracyberattack.Theresultsofourexperiments
deploymentsbutwithheterogeneousservicerequirements?We
confirmed the merit of our approach. In the future, we intend
observethatthefirsttwoconcernsareinterlinkedandtherefore
to investigate the design of novel and cost-effective architec-
we have to address them jointly.
turalsolutionstoensurethefeasibilityofIoT-basedapproaches
First, no solution is best fits in all scenarios therefore we
in the early detection of bushfire, as discussed in the further
need a holistic approach to understand the emergency of
discussion section.
the bushfire problem before we choose the right solution.
Nevertheless, we do not argue that our approach will replace
the existing solutions, rather we emphasize that it would be REFERENCES
beneficial to use the proposed approach on top of the exist-
[1] J.Russell-Smithetal.,“Bushfires‘downunder’:Patternsandimplica-
ing approaches in an integrated way. In view of the second tions of contemporary australian landscape burning,” Int. J. Wildland
Fire,vol.16,no.4,pp.361–377,2007.
concern, we emphasize that further research is required to
[2] Bushfires. Accessed: Nov. 10, 2020. [Online]. Available:
investigate the modification of IoT-based forest monitoring https://www.ga.gov.au/scientific-topics/community-safety/bushfire
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.5274 IEEEINTERNETOFTHINGSJOURNAL,VOL.9,NO.7,APRIL1,2022
[3] Value of Insurance Losses from Major Weather Events in Australia [29] S.Rajasegarar et al. “Ellipsoidal neighbourhood outlier factor for dis-
as of January 2020. Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available: tributed anomaly detection in resource constrained networks,” Pattern
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1098529/australia-insurance-losses- Recognit.,vol.47,no.9,pp.2867–2879,2014.
from-natural-disasters/ [30] V.K.Sachan,S.A.Imam,andM.T.Beg,“Energy-efficientcommuni-
[4] 2019–20 Australian Bushfires—Frequently Asked Questions: A cation methods in wireless sensor networks: A critical review,” Int. J.
Quick Guide. Accessed: Nov. 15, 2020. [Online]. Available: Comput.Appl.,vol.39,no.17,pp.35–48,2012.
https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/library/prspub/7234762/ [31] IBRLDataset. (2020). City of Melbourne Open Data Homepage.
upload_binary/7234762.pdf [Online]. Available: https://data.melbourne.vic.gov.au/Environment/
[5] Real-Time Bushfire Monitoring Satellite System to be Developed Sensor-readings-with-temperature-light-humidity-ev/ez6b-syvw
by Geoscience Australia. Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020. [Online]. [32] G. Fortino et al., “Towards multi-layer interoperability of hetero-
Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-08-11/real-time-bushfire- geneous IoT platforms: The INTER-IoT approach,” in Integration,
monitoring-system-to-be-developed/6688510 Interconnection,andInteroperabilityofIoTSystems.Cham,Switzerland:
[6] MorethanOneBillionAnimalsKilledinAustralianBushfires.Accessed: Springer,2018,pp.199–232.
Nov. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sydney.edu.au/news- [33] L. Zanzi, F. Giust, and V. Sciancalepore, “M2 EC: A multi-tenant
opinion/news/2020/01/08/australian-bushfires-more-than-one-billion- resourceorchestrationinmulti-accessedgecomputingsystems,”inProc.
animals-impacted.html IEEEWirelessCommun.Netw.Conf.(WCNC),2018,pp.1–6.
[7] P. Yu, R. Xu, M. J. Abramson, S. Li, and Y. Guo, “Bushfires in
Australia: A serious health emergency under climate change,” Lancet Mohammad Reza Nosouhi (Member, IEEE)
Planet.Health,vol.4,no.1,pp.e7–e8,2020. received the master’s degree from Isfahan
[8] J. Alexandra and C. M. Finlayson, “Floods after bushfires: Rapid University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 2006,
responses for reducing impacts of sediment, ash, and nutrient slugs,” and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Aust.J.WaterResourc.,vol.24,no.1,pp.1–3,2020. Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, in
[9] T. Fukuhara, T. Kouyama, S. Kato, R. Nakamura, Y. Takahashi, and 2020.
H. Akiyama, “Detection of small wildfire by thermal infrared camera HeiscurrentlyworkingasaResearchFellowwith
withtheuncooledmicrobolometerarrayfor50-kgclasssatellite,”IEEE Keshav Sood with the Centre for Cyber Security
Trans.Geosci.RemoteSens.,vol.55,no.8,pp.4314–4324,Aug.2017.
Research and Innovation, Deakin University,
[10] Bushfire Tracking with Sentinel Hotspots. Accessed: Nov. 11, 2020.
Geelong,VIC,Australia.
[Online].Available:https://www.csiro.au/en/Research/Astronomy/Earth-
observation/Sentinel-hotspots
[11] Digital Earth Australia Hotspots. Accessed: Nov. 15, 2020. [Online].
Available:https://hotspots.dea.ga.gov.au#/ Keshav Sood received the B.Tech. degree in elec-
[12] M. A. Akhloufi, A. Couturier, and N. A. Castro, “Unmanned aerial tronics engineering (Distinction) and the M.Tech.
vehiclesforwildlandfires: Sensing,perception, cooperationandassis- degree in optical fiber engineering from Punjab
tance,” Drones, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: Technical University, Jalandhar, India, in 2007
https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/5/1/15 and 2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
[13] J.J.Roldán-Gómez,E.González-Gironda,andA.Barrientos,“Asurvey information technology from Deakin University,
on robotic technologies for forest firefighting: Applying drone swarms Geelong,VIC,Australia,in2018.
toimprovefirefighters’efficiencyandsafety,”Appl.Sci.,vol.11,no.1, He worked as a Research Fellow with the
p.363,2021.
Advanced Cyber Security Engineering Research
[14] Drones to Assist Firefighters in Emergencies. Accessed: Nov.
Centre, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan,
14, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nsw.gov.au/news/drones-to-
NSW,Australia.HeiscurrentlyaLecturerwiththe
assist-firefighters-emergencies
Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation, School of IT, Deakin
[15] A. Asuncion and D. J. Newman. UCI Machine Learning Repository.
University.
Irvine, University of California, Department of Information and
Computer Science. Accessed: Oct. 16, 2020. [Online]. Available:
NeerajKumar(SeniorMember,IEEE)receivedthe
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Forest+Fires
Ph.D.degreeinCSEfromShriMataVaishnoDevi
[16] M. Yan et al., “Outliers detection of cultivated land quality grade
University,Katra,India,in2009.
results based on spatial autocorrelation,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Agro-
Geoinformat.(Agro-Geoinformatics),2016,pp.1–5. He is currently a Full Professor with the
[17] M.DasandS.K.Ghosh,“MeasuringMoran’siinacost-efficientman- Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
nertodescribealand-coverchangepatterninlarge-scaleremotesensing Thapar University, Patiala, India. He is also
imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. in Remote Sens., with the Department of Computer Science and
vol.10,no.6,pp.2631–2639,Jun.2017. InformationEngineering,AsiaUniversity,Taichung
[18] Myfirewatch. Accessed: Nov. 14, 2020. [Online]. Available: City, Taiwan, and with the School of Computer
https://myfirewatch.landgate.wa.gov.au/map.html Science, University of Petroleum and Energy
[19] T. Yang and W. C. Arthur. (2015). Bushfire Attack Level Toolbox. Studies,Dehradun,India.
Accessed: Nov. 14, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ecat.ga.gov.au/
geonetwork/srv/eng/catalog.search#/metadata/83736 Tricia Wevill received the Bachelor of Science
[20] J.Whittaker,M.Taylor,andC.Bearman,“Whydon’tbushfirewarnings (Hons.)andPh.D.degreesfromMonashUniversity,
work as intended? Responses to official warnings during bushfires in Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 1999 and 2009,
new south wales, australia,” Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduction, vol. 45, respectively.
May2020,Art.no.101476. SheisaLecturerofEnvironmentalScienceswith
[21] N. de Preu. (2020). Submission to the Bushfires Royal Commission. Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia. Her
[Online]. Available: https://naturaldisaster.royalcommission.gov.au/ research interests include the study of vegetation
submissions dynamicsatbothfine-scaleandlandscapelevels,in
[22] Firecloud Project. Accessed: Feb. 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: response to altered environmental and disturbance
https://hackerspace.govhack.org/projects/firecloud
regimes. She is particularly interested in how eco-
[23] Eclipse Foundation. Accessed: Feb. 18, 2021. [Online]. Available:
logicaltheorycanbeusedtounderstandcommunity
http://www.eclipse.org/paho
developmentandtheapplicationofthisknowledgetolandmanagement.
[24] Zerotier: Securly Connect Any Device, Anywhere. Accessed: Sep. 21,
2020.[Online].Available:https://www.zerotier.com/download/
[25] PRTGNetworkMonitor.Accessed:Sep.21,2020.[Online].Available:
https://www.paessler.com Chandra Thapa (Member, IEEE) received the
[26] N. Nesa, T. Ghosh, and I. Banerjee, “Outlier detection in sensed data Ph.D. degree from the University of Newcastle,
using statistical learning models for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Callaghan,NSW,Australia,in2018.
Commun.Netw.Conf.(WCNC),2018,pp.1–6. He is a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Distributed
[27] L. Lyu, J. Jin, S. Rajasegarar, X. He, and M. Palaniswami, “Fog- SystemsSecurity,Data61,CSIRO,Marsfield,NSW,
empoweredanomalydetectioninIoTusinghyperellipsoidalclustering,” Australia.Hisworkingdomainisprivacy-preserving
IEEEInternetThingsJ.,vol.4,no.5,pp.1174–1184,Oct.2017. distributedAI/machinelearning,security,andtrust.
[28] A. Ayad, A. Zamani, A. Schmeink, and G. Dartmann, “Design and
implementationofahybridanomalydetectionsystemforIoT,”inProc.
6thInt.Conf.InternetThingsSyst.Manage.Security(IOTSMS),2019,
pp.1–6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Saskatchewan. Downloaded on June 17,2023 at 23:04:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.